---
title: Handout on Omnipotence
date: 2010-09-30 16:20:23
layout: phil670-post
section: discuss
comments: true
published: true
excerpt: Follow the link for a corrected version of the handout that was passed out in class today.
---

The handout I passed out in class had some unfortunate formatting errors---most especially in the section that runs through the definitions Swinburne labels [C], [D], and [E]. I've tweaked it to fix those problems, but have not attempted to fix any problems with the content :-)

## Definitions of Omnipotence

Omnipotence~1~
  ~ the power to bring about any state of affairs
  ~ ∀S(S is omnipotent ≡ ∀x~SOA~(S is able to bring about x))

Omnipotence~2~
  ~ the power to bring about any possible state of affairs
  ~ ∀S(S is omnipotent ≡ ∀x~SOA~(x is possible ⊃ S is able to bring
    about x))

Omnipotence~3~
  ~ the power to bring about any state of affairs, even impossible
    states of affairs
  ~ ∀S(S is omnipotent ≡ ∀x~SOA~(S is able to bring about x))

Omnipotence~4~
  ~ the power to do anything (bring about any state of affairs) possible to power P
  ~ ∀S(S is omnipotent ≡ ∀x(x is possible to P ⊃ S is able to do (bring about) x))

Omnipotence~5~
  ~ the power for S to bring about every possible state of affairs
    of the form *that S does x*.
  ~ ∀S(S is omnipotent ≡ ∀x(*A's performing x* is possible ⊃ S is
    able to perform x.))

McEar
  ~ A man who is only able to scratching his ear.

McEar is omnipotent:

-   The only x such that *McEar's performing x* is possible is
    *scratching McEar's ear*.
-   McEar is able to perform *scratching McEar's ear*.
-   So, by O~5~, McEar is omnipotent.

## Swinburne

Omnipotence~C~
:   ∀S[(S is omnipotent) ≡ ∀x(S is able to bring about x)

Objection: There are states of affairs that are possible, but which
it is not possible for any agent to bring about.

Examples:

(a) past states (or states earlier than the action), 
(b) present states (states simultaneous with the action), 
(c) necessary states.

Argument for (b):

1.  to bring about a state Y of a system Q is to cause Q to pass
    from being in some state X to being in state Y.
2.  But an agent can only do that by acting upon Q when it was in
    state X, that is, before it was in state Y.
3.  So the action of bringing about a state of affairs must
    commence before the existence of that state of affairs.

Argument for (c):

1.  All red objects in the world will be colored, no matter what
    any agent does.
2.  So no agent can bring it about that all the red objects in the
    world are colored.

Consider:

1.  Necessarily, some created thing exists.
2.  So no agent can bring it about that some created thing exists.

Omnipotence~D~
:   ∀S(t)( S is omnipotent at t ≡ ∀x[( x is a contingent state of affairs after t ) ⊃ (S is able at t to bring about x )]


> we must understand here by x being a possible state of affairs
> after t that x be not merely possible and after t but that x be ...
> compatible with what has happened at and before t.

Accidental Necessity
  ~ x is accidentally necessary as of t in @ ≡ every possible world
    that agrees with @ up to t is a world in which x obtains.

Accidental Necessity (alt)
  ~ x is accidentally possible ≡ x can (still) come about.

Accidental Possibility
  ~ x is accidentally possible as of t in @ ≡ there is a possible
    world that agrees with @ up to t in which x obtains.

Accidental Contingency
  ~ x is accidentally contingent as of t in @ ≡ x is accidentally
    possible as of t in @ but not accidentally necessary as of t in
    @.


Objection: Uncaused states, states not caused by S.

> this implies that for S to be omnipotent in 1973, S must be able to
> bring about a completely uncaused state of affairs in 1974 or a
> state of affairs in 1974 not brought about by S. For all these
> states are [accidentally contingent] as of 1973.

Omnipotence~E~
:   ∀S(t)[( S is omnipotent at t) ≡ ∀x [(( x is accidentally
contingent as of t ) & (The occurence of x after t does not entail
that S did not bring about x at t )) ⊃ (S is able at t to bring
about x ) ]

## Paradox of the Stone (Savage's version)

Where S is any being:

(1) Either S can create a stone which S cannot lift, or S cannot
    create a stone which S cannot lift.
(2) If S can create a stone which S cannot lift, then, necessarily,
    there is at least one task which S cannot perform (lift the stone
    in question)
(3) If S cannot create a stone which S cannot lift, then,
    necessarily, there is at least one task which S cannot perform
    (create the stone in question)
(4) Hence there is at least one task S cannot perform
(5) If S is an omnipotent being, S can perform any task.
(6) Therefore S is not omnipotent.

### Savage's Solution

Deny:

3.  If S cannot create a stone which S cannot lift, then,
    necessarily, there is at least one task which S cannot perform.

4.  S cannot create a stone which S cannot lift


is equivalent to

B.  If S can create a stone, S can lift it.

And B does not entail that S is limited in power.

### Swinburne's response to Savage:

B does entail a limit on S's power. This becomes clear when you
bring in time.

### Swinburne's Solution

Reject:

5.  If S is an omnipotent being, then S can perform any task.

6.  If S is an omnipotent being, then S can perform any task which
    it is possible for S to perform.

7.  If S is omnipotent, then S can bring about any accidentally
    contingent state of affairs that does not entail that S did not
    bring it about.


This, but not (5), is true.

Now consider the revision of (2):

2.  If S can create a stone which S cannot lift, then, necessarily,
    there is at least one task which S cannot perform (namely, lift the
    stone in question).

This is false.

Two claims about (2):

-   The fact that he can doesn't entail that he does.
-   "But anyway the task described is again an impossible task for
    S to perform."


