I am an assistant professor of philosophy at the Ohio State University,
soon to be an assistant professor of philosophy at [Illinois State
University]. I'm primarily a metaphysician, but I also have research
projects in the history of philosophy. A chunk of my current research
focuses on the unreal: the past and future, the merely possible, and the
fictional. A related chunk focuses on temporal instability (change) and
modal instability (contingency). Another related chunk focuses on the
indices we use to navigate the contingent, the temporary, the local, and
the fictional: worlds, times, and places (the indices for fiction are
controversial: perhaps they are contexts or interpretations or fictional
realms). Also, I work on the history of the Liar Paradox in the Medieval
Arabic tradition, and I am working on a paper on Boethius and divine
foreknowledge.

I have broad philosophical interests, extending well beyond my active
areas of research. These include interests in philosophy of action,
philosophy of religion, and the intersection of metaphysics and value
theory.

<img class="gravatar" onclick="$(this).addClass('gravatar2').delay(3000).slideUp('fast');setTimeout('dm()',2500);"  src="http://www.gravatar.com/avatar.php?gravatar_id=f5c32764cbb1669dd68cb9130ee9fe86" alt=""/>
When not working, I am probably playing with [my daughter][], working in
the garden, watching TV, or messing around on a computer. If I were the
person I'd like to be, I'd instead be playing with my daughter,
[collecting wild mushrooms][] and messing around in boats: specifically,
guerilla camping from my [East German folding kayak][] along the
Olentangy River.

You can ~~stalk~~ find me on [PhilPapers][] and [Picasaweb][] and
[Twitter][] and [Github][]. and [Google+][]. I still have accounts on
[Flickr][] and [Facebook][] and [Academia.edu][], but I don't use them
much any more. You are also welcome to dig through my [recipe box][] if
you'd like.

You can also read [about the software I use][] or [about how this site
is generated and hosted][]. And you can [fork me on github][].

  [Illinois State University]: http://philosophy.illinoisstate.edu/
  [my daughter]: http://flickr.com/photos/davsans/tags/hazel/
  [collecting wild mushrooms]: http://morelmushroomhunting.com/morelfinds.html
  [East German folding kayak]: http://www.poucher-boote.de/index.php?rz85
  [PhilPapers]: http://philpapers.org/s/David%20Sanson
  [Picasaweb]: http://picasaweb.google.com/dsanson
  [Twitter]: http://twitter.com/davsans22
  [Github]: http://github.com/dsanson
  [Google+]: https://plus.google.com/104626545807063538107
  [Flickr]: http://www.flickr.com/photos/davsans/
  [Facebook]: http://www.facebook.com/people/David_Sanson/12455093
  [Academia.edu]: http://osu.academia.edu/DavidSanson/
  [recipe box]: http://www.evernote.com/pub/dsanson/favoriterecipes
  [about the software I use]: /software
  [about how this site is generated and hosted]: /site
  [fork me on github]: http://github.com/dsanson/dsanson.github.com
