---
title: Reality and Operators
date: 2010-10-05 17:58:47
layout: blog
section: blog
comments: true
published: true
excerpt: Here is a set of puzzles related to reality operators, fiction operators, Meinongianism, and such stuffs.
---

Here is a set of puzzles related to reality operators, fiction operators, Meinongianism, and such stuffs.

Some sentential operators appear to block ontological commitment. For example,

1.	∃x~Gx

commits me to the existence of at least one thing that is not F. But

2.  ~∃xGx

does not commit me to the existence of anything that is not F. More controversially, while

3.  ∃x**P**Gx (I'm using **P** instead of the diamond for the possibility operator)

commits me to the existence of at least one thing that could be F, 

4.  **P**∃xGx

does not commit me to the existence of anything that could be F.

Fine's reality operator seems to do the opposite: 

5.	∃xGx

commits me to the existence of at least one thing that is F, but it does not commit me to the **reality** of that thing, while

6.  **R**∃xGx

commits me to the reality of at least one F. Making the plausible assumption that ontological commitment goes with what really exists, not just with what exists, we can think of the reality operator as a commitment inducing operator.

Note that here we seem to have a robust form of Meinongianism. It is often said that the Meinongian is committed to an existence predicate. But perhaps the Meinongian can instead make use of a Reality operator.

One puzzle that immediately arises is how something like (5) can be understood to be true free from ontological commitment. This is, I suppose, similar to the question of how (4) can be understood to be true free from ontological commitment. In the case of (4), I have long thought that the right answer lies in explaining the "metaphysics of the operator", but I've never been quite sure how to do that or what that even means. But (5) has no operator. So what then?

For someone like Sider, it looks like the story here has to do with telling some sort of how (5)---the sentence---ends up being a true but misleading representation of the real facts. I'm not sure what Fine wants to say.

It is tempting at this point to bring things back into line with tradition, and replace the **R** operator---the commitment inducing operator---with an opposite commitment blocking operator used to express what is the case but not really the case, e.g, a 'fictionally' or 'not really' or 'non-fundamentally' operator. Let's use **F**. Then we can replace (5) with

7. **F**∃xGx

and (6) with

8. ∃xGx

Sanity has been restored: our unqualified quantifier expresses ontological commitment. If we want to avoid such commitment, we must invoke a commitment blocking operator. Insofar as we worry about the cogency of supposing something like (7) is true without any further account of the underlying metaphysics expressed in **F**-less terms, we are on the same territory as we were when we worried about (4).

So here is one question: what advantage is gained by using the **R** operator instead of the **F** operator?

And here is another question: is there any real difference between a view expressed using the **R** operator and the corresponding view expressed using the **F** operator?

Put that aside, and suppose we have the **R** operator. Is it factive? That is, do we accept that:

9. **R**∃xGx --> ∃xGx

If so, why? Note that I see no reason to accept the same principle expressed in the **F** language:

10. ∃xGx --> **F**∃xGx

In the **F** language, this looks like some sort of principle that demands that reality percolate up. What is okay is something like:

10. ∃xGx --> (**F**∃xGx or ∃xGx)

But that is trivial. Maybe **F** is the wrong operator. Maybe I need just a single operator that expresses something like 'is fictionally the case or is the case'. But then again, maybe **R** is a single operator that expresses something like 'is the case or is really the case', in which case (9) is trivial.

Questions of purity look like analogues to questions about seriousness and rigidity. Those of us who are impure, unserious, and obstinately rigid (at least when it comes to variables) should see where those worries go in this context.

Note that we might want to express the claim that something is not real using **R** as follows:

11.	∃x~**R**∃y(y=x)

or

12. ∃x**R**(y)(y≠x)

Are these equivalent? Does '~**R**p' entail '**R**~p'? Why? Doesn't that threaten an "explosion" of real negative facts?

If (12) is allowed, is this also allowed:

13. ∃x**R**Gx

I'm not sure how to think about this, metaphysically. Should we insist that anything that is really the case can only be about real things? That's purity. If we give up purity, we accept things like (13).

If we accept (13), are there some values of 'F' that are okay and others that are not---are there some properties such that really instantiating them entails being real yourself, and others that do not? (This looks like the question of whether or not some properties are existence entailing, dressed up in new clothes.)

What about the inverse question? Can we express the claim that some real thing is F but not really F? If we don't accept purity, it seems like this is something we might want to say, right?

14. **R**∃x~**R**Gx

doesn't do it, unless we assume that anything that is not really the case is the case, which is obviously false. So we need some actuality operator whose complement is **R** instead of **P**. Let's call it '**F**'. Then we can express what we want with something like

15. **R**∃x**F**Gx

If **R** is factive and **F** is factive, then (15) comes out true. But shouldn't it be *just as suspicious* as

16. **P**∃x**A**Gx?



